Acquiring downlink. Four, three, two, one.
There are always steps to be taken, one right after another, and what you do is
you calmly and rationally and sometimes, as quickly as possible, go through
those steps. We were, of course, in serious danger of losing all of our oxygen,
which meant all of our electrical power and our propulsion system would die
also. The real story of Apollo 13.
so this is a very exciting summer in space hi i'm jeff fox and this time on
inside space with the space center in houston texas nothing about this norm
faggard has been up in the mirror set a u.s record for time spent he will be
retrieved by the shuttle which this time actually will be acting like a shuttle
and this summer ron howard's brand new film apollo 13 effect that's why we're in
houston this is the weekend of the big press showing and right here at the space
center just a whole exhibit of the things that went into the movie. But as long
as we're going to meet the director and the stars, you might as well too. Apollo
13 flight controllers, give me a go, no, go for launch. Booster. Go. Retro. Go.
Vital. We're go flight. Guidance. Guidance, go. Surgeon. Go flight. Ecom. We're
go flight. GNC. We're go. Tell them you. Go. Control. Go flight. Ron Howard's
Apollo 13 might be the most historically accurate entertainment hollywood has
ever produced 25 years ago the mass media had begun to present a workaday
attitude about space but according to the men and women who actually lived them
manned space launches were anything but predictable it's nothing routine about
flying to the moon i can vouch for that there were giants on and off the earth
in those days
Apollo 13 is based on an autobiographical account by Jim Lovell. Naval aviator,
astronaut on Gemini 7 and commander of Gemini 12. He'd come tantalizingly close
to the moon on Apollo 8. But when an ear infection bumped Al Shepherd's crew
from the third lunar mission, Lovell thought he had his shot. You know that
Easter vacation trip we had planned for Acapulco? I was thinking there might be
a slight change in destination maybe say the moon Jim is a very competitive and
driven and yet at the same time completely pleasant and unobtrusive kind of guy
he does have everything very well organized if you're gonna be taking a trip
with Jim he'll do everything he'll drive he'll tell you when you're gonna eat
he'll plot out the gas, they'll suggest, you can take 20 minutes nap now, he's
that organized. It's hard for me to recognize those qualities, I try to do
everything logically and to make sure we cover all of our bases. That's perhaps
what Tom was talking about. Houston, we have a main bus A underbolt now, it's
reading 25 and a half, main bus B is reading SIP right now. Bill Paxton plays
Fred Hayes. a Mississippi born engineer who had served in the Navy, Marines and
Air Force. Tell me a little bit about Fred Haynes. I found him to be very
rootful, good sense of humor. And I tried to bring some of that to it. He's a
you know he's a rocket scientist. I mean, these guys are aerospace engineers,
orbital mechanics. He still had kind of a country boy sense about him. He was in
the flying business. Yeah, he's in the flying business. The only military choice
I had that would lead to a commission as an officer was the Naval Aviation Cadet
program. I had never been in an airplane in my life. Had no desire to fly. But
it was a way to become an officer. What was that gauge reading before you hit
the switch? You don't tell me how to fly the damn sea, am I right? You don't
even know, do you? They brought me in here, they do a job. They asked me to stir
the damn tanks, and I stirred the tanks. I just asked you what the gauge was
reading. Kevin Bacon had an additional acting challenge. His portrayal of Jack
Swigert, an Air Force fighter jock also making his first trip into space, had to
be based on other people's memories. The citizens of Colorado had elected Swiger
to Congress in 1982, but he died of cancer before he could serve. Jack was just
a new guy on that crew, and I think he adapted very well, and he did everything
that was asked of him. I think that entire crew were absolutely superb to work
with. Gene Krantz was one of four flight directors on 13. He was sitting console
during most of the critical mission phases. Gene is today as he was then,
exactly the sort of guy you'd want doing that job. Disciplined, concerned with
morale. He's tough. He's competent. The very definition of a mission controller.
Krantz is played by Ed Harris. He knew what he was doing, that's for sure. He
was responsible for it all. Once that rocket leaves the launch pad, you know,
it's his baby. He's calling the shots. So. The flight director's got the
responsibility during the course of the mission for every action associated with
mission success in crew safety. This mission, Apollo 13, very rapidly moved from
the mission success, get to the moon and land on it down to a survival type
situation.
It's April 1970. America is fighting an undeclared war in Southeast Asia
and struggling with a cultural revolution back home.
Nixon rules the White House, but ROC rules the airwaves. And out at Cape
Kennedy's launch Complex 39, Apollo 13, NASA's first real lunar science mission,
is making ready for liftoff.
Four Americans have walked on the moon and returned to walk among us.
Some Americans are questioning the value of sending others. Many Americans are
simply preoccupied, caught up in sweeping societal changes as patriotism and
uniformity fall out of alignment.
Most Americans have become comfortable with the space age. They've forgotten the
danger. Forgotten that three years earlier, three American astronauts lost their
lives nowhere near space.
Here are three guys who are always looking at death and in a job that even when
you're just practicing, you can die. Sets the stakes. The Apollo 1 really showed
you what could go wrong and how dangerous this whole situation was. It showed
that, look, machines will break down. And this is what these guys were trusting,
not only the entire prestige of their undertaking, but their lives too as well,
is the fact that an engineered machine will work well enough in order to take
them to the moon and bring them back home. And we all know that we all have
toaster ovens that don't always work the way they're supposed to. And one of the
first things you think about when you see the Apollo capsule, especially when
you stand next to it, is it's tiny, at least relatively tiny. Compare this to
the Space Shuttle. This could probably fit in the Space Shuttle, and you had
three guys sitting cheek to jowl. It's unbelievable. Now when we come back,
we'll meet some of the people who lived through Apollo 13, so don't go away.
This is Houston. We are Go from Orange. Four, three, two, one.
I'm sorry, don't say anything about that. Space Center in Houston, sort of
ironic that this command module or the command module for Apollo 13 actually was
called The Odyssey because the trip turned out to be quite an Odyssey. In fact,
Tom Hanks said, it's as great a saga as anything the Greeks ever put to paper.
One of the seven greatest stories in literature. How do you get back home? We're
go for launch. launch, T-minus. 15, 14, 13, 12, I had been to see a launch. I
found it to be this sort of immensely powerful experience. Mission sequence
starts, three, two, one.
Houston, we have cleared the tower at 13, 13. I'm staying up.
The launch sequence got me. When we were in the full suits which are not
airtight but you do have to have air pumped into it in order to breathe. We're
yanked back into those seats flat on our backs. And when they started shaking
that thing, and we're shouting out our lines, and there's a lot of noise going
on, I tell you, I felt like we were riding it. The Saturn V is the most powerful
launcher of its time. Able to throw 200,000 pounds into orbit, it stands 363
feet tall and weighs almost 6.5 million pounds. Its first 3 stages will loft
Apollo 13 into a 118-mile-high parking orbit. The 4th stage will send them
tracking for the moon. Several hundred miles downrange, second stage engine
number 5 cuts off 2 minutes early. Controllers and crew hope this is the worst
they'll have to deal with on 13.
Looks like we just had a glitch for this mission. Well any time you lose an
engine in the launch phase, it's pucker time. And I had, frankly had forgotten
that it cut off as early as it did. And those other four engines just continued
to burn. Had to burn a little bit longer and used up all the same amount of
fuel. So it ended up not to be a big problem. And we kinda took things one thing
at a time. We had the problem. We knew when we got off that stage we'd be okay,
and we didn't carry it over in any way that it was going to be a precursor of
anything that was going to happen, but we were ready to respond to anything that
happened during the rest of the flight as we had to later on. For 56 hours,
Apollo 13 smoothly obeys Sir Isaac Newton's laws. Lovell, Hayes, and Swigert
perform a customary live TV broadcast, but up against Dick Cavett laughing and
the movie of the week, the Apollo 13 show is seen only in mission control. Good
evening, America, and welcome aboard, Apollo 13. Hello, Ron.
This is the crew of Apollo 13. We should have been there. Nice evening, and
we're just about ready to close out our inspection of Aquarius and get back for
a pleasant evening and odyssey. Good night. With the TV show over, Houston has
just a few housekeeping chores for the crew before they're due to enter a sleep
period. One item is to stir the cryogenic tanks containing super-cold oxygen.
Not quite a liquid and not quite a gas, the oxygen will stratify and fail to
flow correctly unless it's stirred by a small fan located inside the tanks. As
command module pilot, it's Swigert's job. Dane, we've got one more item for you
when you get a chance, so we'd like it to stir up your cryo tanks. Roger that.
Houston, we've had a problem. Man, B, both undervolt. Roger, may and B
undervolt. 10 by 13. We're looking at it. The explosion that took but a second
was actually two years in the making, a faulty temperature-controlled switch
that somehow made it past all the checkpoints from manufacture to launch. The
Lovell's crew didn't know it. One oxygen tank had overheated, a couple of
stirring fan rotations, and the pressure was just too much. But at the time of
the explosion in the spacecraft, Several controllers had single events that
occurred. The instrumentation communications guy called up and said, Hey Flight,
we switch from narrow beam to wide beam. We had a main bus under vault. So there
were indications of something showing up at many of the controllers' console.
And very shortly thereafter you heard the crew come down and say, Hey Houston
we've got a problem. But it really took us a while to decide what the problem
was or how bad it was, we had been trained not to jump too quickly, not to do
things too quickly until we were sure of what we were doing. And the problem
that people were having in the control center is there was such a massive set of
indications of a problem of a very large dimension that people weren't sure that
they could believe what they were seeing on their cages. One at a time, people.
One at a time, one at a time. E.com, is this an instrumentation problem or are
we looking at real power loss here? It, it's reading a quadruple failure, that
can't happen. It's, it's got to be instrumentation. They were searching for some
common explanation which would help explain all of these crazy readings and one
of those common explanations could be something wrong with the instrumentation
system, some kind of electrical problem. And that's the most frustrating, kind
of, problem that you can have as, as a flight controller, was to know that
things are happening, and you don't know exactly what they are. We had a pretty
large bang associated with the caution and warning now. Lovell kept saying, it
was kind of a fine spray, almost like a mist. See, on the loose spray, looking
out the hatch, so we are bending something. But then it crystallized and stayed
with them. And then, of course, there were particles, Mylar particles and pieces
of metal you know from the explosion.
Roger we copy your venting. Okay, can you tell us anything about the venting,
what's coming from, what window you see it at? Coming out of window 1 right now,
Jack. I couldn't tell you today why I looked out the window but then that's when
I saw the gas escaping and that told me that we were of course in serious danger
of losing all of our oxygen which meant all of our electrical power and our
propulsion system would die also. Then when Jim Lovell came down and said, hey
we're venting something, then it was sort of like, gee, you just got rabbit
punched. You hit it right in the back of the head. And all of a sudden that
says, not only is this a problem, this is a survival situation we're moving
into. So let's start thinking down that track right now. We were worried about
water. We were worried about power. We were worried about oxygen to breathe. We
were worried about all the consumables, as we called them. and my concern was
increasing all the time. It went from, I wonder what this is going to do to the
landing, to I wonder if we can get back home again. We now show an altitude of
180,521 nautical miles. Here in mission control, we're looking, now looking
towards an alternate mission, swinging around the moon and using the lunar
module power systems because of the situation that has developed here this
evening this is apollo controlled houston with limited oxygen there's not only a
problem with life support there's also no way to make enough electrical power or
enough water in mission control kranz decides the lunar module must become the
lifeboat home named aquarius the lunar module was designed to support two people
for up to 45 hours. Now, it must sustain three for almost double that time. For
the crew of Apollo 13, the moon is lost. I'll say the immediate thing I had
emotion was just frustration and sick to my stomach and with disappointment
because the mission was aborted. We had we had a cascading set of things that
had had to work right for our survival. The first was that the LIMM had not been
damaged by the explosion. The second thing was to use the LIMM engine to get
pointed back in the right direction. We were headed in a direction that would
still have us in orbit today. Wasd Patrice- Once we thought it was survival,
that we were going to have some difficulties getting the crew back home, each
one of the controllers, thought what have I got to save in order to get there?
How can I cut a corner to provide a little bit more electrical power? So this
control team very smoothly moved into, let's figure out how we're going to get
this guy home. We have to turn off the radars, cabin heater, instrument
displays, the guidance computer, the whole smack. Whoa, guidance computer? What
if they need to do another burn? Gene, they won't even know which way they're
pointed. The more time we talk down here, the more juice they waste up there.
I've been looking at the data for the past hour. That's the deal? That's the
deal. Okay, John. The minute we finish the burn, we'll power down the limb. All
right. What kind of guy were you as a... Well, I think I was probably one of the
most emotional of the flight directors. I generally would let my feelings be
expressed very clearly, and I think everybody that knew me was able to read me
pretty well, and I spent a lot of time with them. I could read them pretty well.
Find out how to squeeze every amp out of both of these guy's machines. I want
this mark all the way back to Earth with time to spare. We never lost an
American in space. We're sure as hell not gonna lose one on my watch. You're
quoted in the movie as saying that nothing like this would happen on your watch.
That's exactly right.
You have to take and put all of the mission experiences together. Many of these
folks started off in Mercury. Mercury was no piece of cake. We had a bunch of
problems there, but we pulled it out. Came along Gemini. Gemini, we had the
confidence to use the space systems we were given. Apollo, we had problems in
the early days, but we learned to sob mal. We got confidence in the spacecraft.
We got confidence in the crew. We had confidence in the training process. We had
confidence in ourselves, and that's what it took to get this crew home. Lovell,
Hayes, and Swigert fight sickness and CO2 as inside space continues with the
real story of Apollo 13. Stay with us. Four, three, two, one. now
And here's what the Papers of the Day said about Apollo 13. I think NASA put a
pretty good spin on it the first day. As controllers deal with the cascade of
problems, word begins to spread about the troubled mission.
For the crewmen of the Apollo 13, we'll hold silence for a moment, please.
This was hidden from us back then. If you look at the old headline from the
Houston Chronicle, from the first day, it says, Chances of Return... Excellent.
Did we make a mistake by sort of holding this from the public, how much danger
that these three guys were in? I don't think they wanted to create a sense of
panic. I think that, in a lot of ways, they're fairly guarded about it. But the
fact of the matter is, by the time they did come back, It was pretty well known
what was going on and I think the entire world really rallied around their safe
return. At the moment, the astronauts are continuing to try to isolate their
trouble. A late report says the spacecraft now is operating on battery power
alone. All the necessary equipment is being turned off. It seems that the entire
world is caught up in Apollo 13 flight but in the flight control centre, the
size of Gene Krantz universe has shrunk to just the spacecraft, the astronauts
and the ground support staff. And an important point to remember at this time,
too, was the fact that we had gotten off what we call the free return
trajectory. We had done our mid-course maneuver sometime before, and this meant
that we were no longer on a path that would allow us to be swung around the moon
and come back towards a landing spot on the earth. We had gotten off this
trajectory because we wanted to go to our landing site. April 14th, 2.43 a.m.
Lovell commands the lunar module Aquarius to fire its descent engine, the one
they would have used to land on the moon. This burn will slingshot Odyssey and
Aquarius around the far side of the moon and back on a course toward Earth, but
not before consumables will run out. Apollo 13 needs a fast-track home. Our
second milestone was what was known as the Paris-Sythian plus-two burn. Because
consumables were critical, We had decided to burn at about two hours past the
moon, at about 79 hours, a maneuver to shorten the time to get home again. The
burn looked very good. In fact, it was an excellent burn. Our peak current
during the burn was around 50 amps. Immediately thereafter, we gave the crew
their initial power down information to bring the majority of the spacecraft
systems down, with the exception of the communications system. 12 hours or so
part of the burn Kraft was mumbling about getting powered down he wanted to get
powered down right now and Deke Slayton was sitting over there he just wanted
get the crew to sleep we were keeping them up too long and all this kind of
stuff so we finished that burn and all of a sudden three people Kraft comes down
here Slayton comes over and in through the door walks Max Faget and they all
want exactly the opposite things Faget wants to get into the spacecraft. He's
worried about spacecraft thermal control. Slate wants crew put to sleep, Kraft
wants powered down. And they're all incompatible. Moments later, the crew powers
down the Lam. They'll need to save all remaining battery for re-entry into
Earth's atmosphere. By 2.30 AM on the 15th, just eight hours later, the
temperature in Aquarius is ranging from 85 degrees in the sunlight to 22 degrees
in the shadows. I went in there one time to go to sleep and Jack was was on top
of the couch and said, Jack, put up all the window shades. Let's get the place
nice and dark. We'll just relax and have it nice and dark in here. If we can
really get some sleep. And I woke up a couple hours later and I was freezing.
Eventually, the entire spacecraft got down to about 35 degrees Fahrenheit, which
is about the temperature of a refrigerator. I recall that we went in there to
get some hot dogs one day and it was like reaching into the freezer for the
food. And Fred and I broke out our lunar boots, which we had stowed away in the
lunar module. And Jack looked at his wet feet a couple times. But he had an
extra set of underwear, so he put that on. The next most critical thing to me
was that the vehicle stayed functional as we cooled them off. We chilled them
down, in ourselves for that matter, down to below 40 degrees. in some areas of
the vehicles, it actually froze. Oyster was forming everywhere. Uh, you know,
frost was forming on the windows. Uh, it was getting cold. We knew they were
desperately cold. We knew they were desperately tired. Uh, but again, we had our
job to do. They had their job to do. There's little to do now. But wait. Shiver
against the cold and try to rest. Lovell, Hayes, and Swigert have to limit
themselves to six ounces of drinking water each per day. This will not only
conserve water, but reduce the accumulation of urine in the capsule. The only
mistake we probably made throughout the whole flight that caused any concern,
and it wasn't real serious, is that we asked them to, remember we asked them to
stow all the waste? We told them to quit using the urine dump. So they started
stowing it in bags. We thought we were told anyway that don't put any wastewater
dumps over the side because it might disturb the trajectory, and we're tracking
you, and we want to make sure that you can come back and hit the proper angle to
re-enter. We didn't mean for them to do that the whole mission. We forgot about
it. But we forgot to tell them to go ahead and start dumping that stuff, so by
the time they got to the end of the flight, they had bags of urine stored all
over that place.
The long journey home is taking its toll on the astronauts. Fred Hayes is
rapidly showing signs of a deep systemic infection. Yeah, what I developed was a
lower prostate infection, which you can get here. I mean, it has nothing to do
with space. And that was due, I assume, to the coldness, dehydration. So he had
what they call a motorman's friend. It's basically like a catheter you wear with
a bag and you urinate into that. And he digressed into a fever and the shakes,
and by the end of the flight, he was in really pretty bad shape. On board the
crew think they can breathe a little easier. They can see the way out of this
now. But the mission management team is tuning into a new threat. Oxygen for
life support isn't really the problem. Carbon dioxide buildup is. There was a
fellow named Ed Smiley, and he's in the movie, who quite early on recognized
we're gonna have a CO2 problem before too much longer. Both Lunar Module and
Mothership are equipped with canisters of lithium hydroxide to scrub the
astronauts exhaled carbon dioxide out of the air but because odyssey and
aquarius are built by two different companies the canisters from one won't fit
the other we gotta find a way to make this fit into the hole for this using
nothing but that ok, let's build a filter. We have a situation where you have a
square cylinder and a round hole because of the differences in the two
spacecraft. And these guys went off and figured out a way to get this done and
tape it up using checklist covers, plastic bags, suit hoses. The ground read up
a procedure in order to adapt some of the command module lithium hydroxide
canisters for use in the limb. We read that thing. We didn't have in those days
today. We'd probably shoot that up on a teleprinter and have the whole
procedure. We had to read this very detailed procedure, take a 3-foot piece of
tape, do this, do that. They show in the movie, and I guess Lovell says in the
book that they actually when they finally did it, they came and they ran right
up to this desk where we're sitting here. He puts it on your desk and it's this
contraption with masking tape? A whole bunch of paper and masking tape and
everything else. That is correct. Jim and I constructed one of these things. At
this point in time I think the partial pressure of carbon dioxide was reading
about 15 millimeters and we constructed two of these things and put them online
and I think within an hour the partial pressure of co2 was down to two-tenths. I
think the thing that really was neat is that when we got the picture back from
the from the lunar module got the picture back of what they had done, it looked
exactly like the one we had built on the ground. The engineering team that we
have supporting the flight operations, it's called space craft analysis, would
always come up with some gimmicky kind of thing to figure out some way to work
around the problems we were having on board the space craft. It eventually
turned into a discipline we called in flight maintenance.
With no computers online, the crew of Apollo 13 must perform a never-before
-tried manual maneuver when Inside Space returns.
and
uh... this is the size of the life though the lunar module that saved the
astronauts and take my work for it television makes things look bigger than they
really are three guys in here it's just a shame that this This piece of
equipment that saved the astronauts couldn't be brought back with the
astronauts.
A few seats away from the flight director sits the person in charge of
trajectory, and he wasn't a happy fellow. Apollo 13 is starting to veer markedly
and mysteriously off track. No one remembers that Aquarius is built to vent tiny
amounts of steam into space. Lunar modules are designed for short jaunts to the
moon, A few puffs of gas wouldn't amount to much, but over a 200,000-mile voyage
in zero gravity, a tiny, repeated velocity vector can mean the difference
between making it home and becoming a permanent monument to human confusion.
In about 105 hours, the ground, after some tracking, realized that we were not
on a trajectory that would get us safely back home and that we'd have to make
another maneuver. To conserve power, the crew cannot risk activating the LEM's
navigational platform. Electrical energy must be saved to power up the command
module before reentry. This last maneuver was going to be unique because we did
not have the platform powered up. So we didn't have a normal method of
determining the attitude of the spacecraft in order to perform the burn. Because
it was a manual burn, we had a three-man operation. Jack would take care of the
time. he'd tell us when to light off the engine, when to stop it. Fred handled
the pitch maneuver, I handled the roll maneuver, and I pushed the buttons to
start and stop the engine. So, hey, we ought to recommend a three-man limb after
this. I don't know. The control system was designed only to fly the lunar
module. And when that big mass was on there, the center of gravity moved way
out, and movements with our thrusters will not give us the same results. And we
had to learn by, if one movement of the thruster, what that would do to the
actual change in the attitude of the spacecraft. When the car was over, you
know, a lot of people were going to go down the road, in most cases, as a
layman, you begin to realize just how challenging a lot of those procedures
were. For instance? The manual burn. This is not like I just had to keep the
car, you know, on the straightaway and make sure we didn't go over 25 miles an
hour. I mean, this was something that had really never been tried and it was a
life or death maneuver. The die is cast. There's nothing to do but wait. Seventy
hours will elapse before the vacuum of space will be chased away by the
homeworld's atmosphere. Fred Hayes is cold, ill, weak, and uncomfortable. Lovell
and Swigert begin to worry just how this will turn out. You know, Fred Hayes
said something when we met him, he said, well, when there wasn't anything to do,
and there were hours and hours where there was nothing for them to do, he said,
then that was bad, he said. To hear that coming from the guy, you know, that
really speaks volumes. Fear is not a bad thing. It's the human body's way of
bringing all systems online to deal with a dicey situation. Was the crew of 13
ever scared? When you say scared, I think we were concerned. The thing that you
have to realize is that it was not one of these out of control, your car
skidding toward the wall or off the road. You know, as time went on, we got more
and more confidence in the fact that we'd get home. Did they ever think they'd
run out of options? We never gave that a thought. As long as we had something to
do, we just kept doing it. I think they have to, to a certain extent, try their
best to put the fear of death out of their minds. We kept trying to say, you
know, were you scared? Were you scared? What did it like being scared? And they
kept saying again and again and again. We just wanted to work our way through
the problem. Run through the systems... ...and we had a tremendous amount of
help on the ground... ...and we were trying to figure out what to do, you know,
minute to minute. That's really the way they have to think. That's the only way
to deal with it. All three of us knew enough about the command module... to know
that this was not supposed to happen and that we were actually in very serious
trouble. And I had two very competent people on board. Is he a right stuff kind
of guy? I think the right stuff has become this kind of, not 2-dimensional
version of it, but a kind of a quick identification kit for your average
astronaut. I found them all to be, in Jim particular, to be, first off, an
engineer, A guy who understands the systems and knows that there are always
steps to be taken, one right after another. And what you do is you calmly and
rationally, sometimes as quickly as possible go through those steps. That's what
Jim did on the flight. But even he himself, he told me and he intimates it in
the book, that there were some times there where the eyes rolled at the back of
his head and they honestly wondered, how in the world did this happen to me?
We are about 70 hours from home and we think we have the situation in control.
We've projected the consumables as I've described, and we have a plan for
carrying out the rest of the mission, but there's going to be no relaxation at
all. We've tried to simulate virtually everything that we've had the crew to do
that is non-normal that they've done, and we've proven most everything that
we've been able to run on the simulator prior to passing it up to them. There
may be some details we haven't done, but at least we've checked the feasibility
of everything we've done, and we'll continue to do that. In Houston, Ken
Mattingly, John Aaron and a team of engineers are inventing a way to power up
the command module on the little electricity they have left. TK Mattingly flies
the command module simulator for hours, improvising a score of switch throws for
Lovell's crew to play. But there could be no second take of this symphony.
They'd have to get it right on the first read. And our main game plan was to
keep on the plan and not make any mistakes and to squeeze the consumables.
Gene's team, Gene had been off console when he left at the time of the accident
and his whole focus had been on what are we going to do to power up the command
module, how are we going to make it safe, how are we going to configure it for
our best odds for entry. Throughout the night and throughout the days just prior
to this thing, the ground of course was working feverishly with crews in the
simulators and with the engineers looking at the systems, to read up to us a set
of procedures, which we would be able to follow to make a successful entry. As
they're waiting for this final checklist to come forward, it was sort of a race
against time. We had to make sure it was perfect down on the ground, so we
wanted to keep time, you know, available to us to get this checklist right. They
wanted to have some time to think this thing over, so it was really a question
of making the call when it was time to go forward in this. and they were getting
sort of, let's get that thing up here guys, what are you doing down there? If
you have to remember that when we're back on the free-return course, the flight
was going to terminate abruptly when we started to hit the atmosphere, and if we
weren't prepared for it, there was no go-around, second chance. So I was getting
concerned that we wouldn't get the procedures up. By the time we got to the
point where we knew we had enough consumables to make it, and we had a procedure
to get powered up, and assuming the command module was going to come up okay,
which, again, we couldn't do anything about that. It was either going to work or
it wasn't. There were no alternatives. If it didn't, we were done. They did.
They read us up procedures, Fred, Jack, and I practiced these procedures by
reading them and then completed them. I think it's amazing the way that people
can respond so fast to get this job done. Odyssey is alive and online again. The
crew prepares to jettison the service module. For the first time, they'll see
the extent of the damage.
Right by the high-gain antenna, the whole panel is thrown out, almost from the
base to the engine. It was, to me, sort of an amazing sight. I didn't realize
that this whole panel by the high gain antenna was blown clean off right along
the area where the panel normally swings open. The moment has come to cast off
Aquarius. She was built for space and to space she must be released.
The voyage is almost over. Ironically, the very atmosphere which promises air
and life also represents a barrier to cross. Basically, it comes down to this
question. Has Odyssey's heat shield been damaged by the explosion? Will it
withstand the plunge through the Earth's atmosphere? By this point in the space
age, most people know that communications with capsules are impossible during
the last fiery plunge, but it usually only takes three minutes.
so we sat there for a while continuing our patient waiting.
The blackout period was extended and for some reason that we don't know why
today instead of being in blackout for about three minutes we were in this
blacked out communications phase for about four minutes. Odyssey, Houston, we
show you on the mains. It really looks great. An extremely loud applause here in
Mission Control. And then all of a sudden, Swaggart comes in loud and clear and
says, hello, Houston, this is Apollo 13, everything's fine. The very
technologies which allow Earth to talk to spacecraft now flash television
pictures around the world as Apollo 13 splashes into the Pacific Ocean.
Thank you. For Lovell, Hayes, and Swagger, the odyssey is over. I think I can
truthfully say that never before in the history of man have more people watched
together, prayed together, and rejoiced together at your safe return than on
this occasion. Paraquivar. Safely aboard the USS Iwo Jima, Apollo 13's Jim
Lovell sends a message on behalf of his crew to the men and women who safely
guided them home. It reads, Words cannot express the praise we have for all the
personnel of the mission control whose dedicated efforts provided a successful
conclusion to Apollo 13. Our deepest and heartfelt thanks. Signed, Jim Lovell,
Jack Swigert, and Fred Hayes.
Putting Apollo 13 in perspective, when we come back with more Inside Space in
just a minute. Don't go away.
Four, three, two, one.
Slide 14 And we're back on Inside Space, looking at Apollo 13 from the Space
Center here in Houston. Now, here's a movie that we all know the ending of. I
mean, the guys come back safe and sound, and yet it's very exciting with all
sorts of revelations and lots and lots of plot twists. And yet it's a movie with
no guns, no gore, no violence, and yet very compelling, which is what I asked
director Ron Howard about. Here you have this incredible action movie. No guns,
no gore, no violence, and very limited sex. No villains. It's a great story.
It's a great story. And it's not really about bad guys and conflict. And it's,
you know, there's the greatest conflict. Are they going to make it? And more
importantly, how in the world did they pull it off? They're trained to solve
problems. And, you know, you listen to, you know, the tapes of— I mean, any
pilot who's going down. And you don't hear him screaming and carrying on and
panic very often. Usually you hear them working the problem, particularly the
military pilots, the highly trained pilots, until the very last instant. So if
you guys were given the opportunity to do it for real, would you? I mean, has
this ignited some fuel in you? I would have done it anyway. If they said you got
to put your career on hold, you got to get two years to the program, you got to
go through all the training, you might not be able to get to fly, but we're
going to try to make it work out, would you do it? I would, I'd do it. Better be
careful what you say. I wouldn't be surprised if I got a call. Well, yeah, yeah.
At the service of my country, I'd do it. We have a lot of heroes now that seem
to have, you know, gone the wrong way, and I hate to have kids follow the, uh,
the actions of, quote, previous famous people who are now in deep trouble.
Hopefully the children of today look carefully at the type of people they want
to follow and to emulate and pick the right people. You know, astronauts have in
the past been a role model for children. We didn't move forward as boldly and
aggressively into the next arena, which was really to take and live in space. I
think we sort of surrendered after the Skylab program. we got the enamored of
transportation we need transportation, but we should have always had that
outpost in space going. The managers at that time myself included, let the
people of the United States down, by not being much more aggressive in
articulating the use of space, the need for our country to continue the process
of exploration, the need to challenge our youth. All of these things, we just
took for granted that someone is going to speak for us, we should have spoken
for ourselves. You know even to this day, when you talk to the people at the
Johnson Space Center, they talk about some of the lessons that were learned on
Apollo 13, and one of them is that when you send people into space, it's just a
very risky thing. But if you take people who are bright and who know their
business, and let them set their minds to any problem, they can do just about
anything. So what should we do to go back into space? Should we send people
again and take that risk? or should we use mechanized units to go there? We'd
like to know how you feel. You can drop us a line. It's Inside Space, USA
Network Sci-Fi Channel, 1230 Avenue of the Americas, New York, New York, 10020,
or on the Internet at InSpace at usanetworks.com. I saw Apollo 13 last night. It
was a great movie, and I cried. And my wife, sitting on my right, cried, and a
producer sitting on my left, cried. it's amazing how a movie where you know the
ending can still evoke so much emotion. Well, I'm Jeff Fox from the Space Center
in Houston and I'll see you next time Inside Space.
13 standby for staging. a second.
The captain of the captain at Houkville, Captain is a witness of this. We got
three, three, that's all good.
Thanks, guys. Please, guys. Go back. The captain of the captain of the captain
of the captain, what is how we do that...